What is a Shell Samurai?
A Shell Samurai has an intuitive understanding of the CLI and Linux
fundamentals. They can navigate the Command Line and configure the Linux
OS to do their bidding. A Shell Samurai tells computers what to do, not the other
way around.
A Shell Samurai does not know everything and never claims to. They are
resourceful, creative and modest. When an issue pops up that they can’t solve,
they’re able to finding documentation or resources to push through to victory.
A Shell Samurai never stops learning. They’re always improving their skills
and learning more.
Thank you for joining me and taking the path to becoming a Shell Samurai!
Let’s learn Linux and kick ass at it together!
- Stetson Blake
15
1. Setting Up a Lab Environment
Lab Setup Intro
This book is one that I want you to be able to follow along with, reference and
use to learn Linux fundamentals more deeply. To assist with that goal, I strongly
recommend setting up a “Lab Server” to follow along with the commands we’ll
give. Without a real working Linux system, you’re just kinda reading words and
hallucinating what a system should behave like. You need to use a real shell and
feel a little bit of pain and struggle, but then success and mastery. Real lab
experience like this is your friend.
I also recommend not using the GUI. Yes, it is a little bit harder to only use a
CLI, but it is much quicker and most production Linux systems you touch will
not offer a GUI. If you decide to install Linux on an old computer or laptop that
has a Window manager, you’ll just need to use the terminal program to follow
along with the examples.
Depending on what computers you have access to and use, there’s a few
options for getting a Linux shell at your disposal. We won’t go deep on every one
of these options, but we’ll guide you towards victory. A Linux Samurai has to do
some homework of their own, after all.
Install Linux on an old Laptop or Desktop computer
Installing Linux on an old system is a great option to get started using Linux.
Installing Linux and using it as your daily driver is a great way to dive into the
deep end. Just be cautious as many newbies may install Linux on their “main
computer” and then break things beyond repair. This isn’t a big deal because you
can simply reinstall and the only cost is your time. If you go this route, be sure to
install Linux on a machine that isn’t your primary computer.
If you decide to take this path, use Ubuntu Desktop available at Ubuntu.com.
Grab the latest version, which is currently 22.02.2 LTS. The LTS references
Long Time Support and means that this edition will be supported for a few years.
16
You’ll need a USB drive to install Ubuntu from a bootable disk or if you’re a
little more old school, you can burn the Ubuntu image to a disc and boot from
that. Ubuntu has setup instructions for installing on a Bootable USB stick here.
Use Windows Subsystem for Linux or WSL
If you’re using Windows 10 or newer, you’re in luck. Windows Subsystem for
Linux (WSL) is a feature of Windows that allows you to run a Linux environment
without running a separate virtual machine.
Windows Subsystem for Linux is probably the easiest way to get a Linux shell
up quickly, but I don’t totally recommend it because it isn’t a “true” Linux
system. There are a couple of drawbacks and performance disadvantages. Some
of the tutorials in this book won’t work 100% correctly if you use WSL and you
might have to google your way through a few error messages. I think it’s more
valuable as a beginner to use one of the other options. That said, if you really,
really want to use WSL…
Here’s how to get a Linux Shell using WSL:
• Enable the Windows Subsystem for Linux feature:
⁃ Open the Start Menu and search for “Turn windows Features on or
off”
⁃ Check the box next to “Windows Subsystem for Linux”
⁃ Click OK and wait for it to install
⁃ Click Restart Now to restart your computer
• Open the Start Menu and search for Microsoft Store and Open It
• Search for Ubuntu
• Click on Ubuntu and make sure you are using the Ubuntu program put
out by Canonical Group Limited
• Click Get
• Wait for it to Install
• Click Open
• WSL will prompt you for a username, go ahead and set one.
• WSL will ask for a password, you can type one and hit enter. Note that the
17
password will not show up on the terminal! This is called blind typing and
is normal. Enter your password again to confirm.
• Congrats you should now have your very own Ubuntu terminal up and
running!
You can access WSL in a few ways. First, either through the start menu and
searching for Ubuntu. Then, you can pin it to start or the task bar. The other way
you can access your shell is by opening Command Prompt or Powershell and
simply typing ubuntu and hitting enter.
Check out the Microsoft Documentation for more info on Windows Subsystem
for Linux.
Use Virtualization Software
Another great option is to use software like VirtualBox or VMWare to install a
Linux system on your laptop or desktop. This option is flexible but requires a
little bit of configuration and setup. It’s free and lets you customize everything
you need to and run any ISO image and flavor of Linux. The Virtual Machine is
segregated from your main computer so you’re free to mess things up and get it
into a broken state without pain.
For more info on using VirtualBox, reference the installation docs Ubuntu has
provided here.
Dual Boot
Dual Booting is a way of installing Linux alongside another operating system
on the same machine. This is a similar route to just installing Linux on a
computer like I mentioned above. You’ll have to do some partitioning of your
hard drive and do some other configuration. Due to that, it’s an option, but not a
very good one in my opinion due to the complexity involved for a newbie.
Use a Server from A Cloud Host
18
This option is my favorite. Today, the “Cloud” is ubiquitous and cheap. For
many years, you’ve been able to rent someone else’s computer in the form of a
“VPS” or Virtual Private Server. There are tons of platforms like Digital Ocean,
Vultr and AWS. Be careful with AWS, because you can really run your bill up if
you don’t know what you’re doing!
Point is, any basic Linux server shouldn’t cost more than $5/month. For some
cloud providers, you can even shut down your server when you aren’t using it
and just pay for the amount of time it’s turned on! Billing changes constantly, so
be sure to read your provider’s FAQ and Billing Documentation to be sure.
If you use this option, be sure to check out the section on SSH in this book as
that is the primary way you’ll connect to a cloud server! When you install your
server, be sure to use the latest version of Ubuntu, which is the Linux
Distribution we’ll use in this book.
The path you take to get access to a Linux Shell doesn’t matter too much. All
that matters is that you start and get a basic bash shell up and running.
